After exploring the measures of central tendency Let's move on to the measures of symmetry.
The most commonly used tool to measure a symmetry is skewness.
This is the formula to calculate it almost always you will use software that performs the calculation
for you.
So in this lesson we will not get into the computation but rather the meaning of skewness so skewness
indicates whether the observations in a dataset are concentrated on one side skewness can be confusing
at the beginning.
So an example is in place.
Remember frequency distribution tables from previous lectures.
Here we have three data sets and their respective frequency distributions.
We have also calculated the means medians and modes.
The first data set has a mean of two point seventy nine and a median of two hence the mean is bigger
than the median.
We say that this is a positive or right skew from the graph.
You can clearly see that the data points are concentrated on the left side.
Note the direction of the skew is counter-intuitive.
It does not depend on which side the line is leading to but rather to which side its tail is leading
to.
So right skewness means that the outliers are to the right.
It is interesting to see the measures of central tendency incorporated in the graph when we have the
right skewness the mean is bigger than the median and the mode is the value with the highest visual
representation in the second graph.
We have plotted a data set that has an equal mean median and mode the frequency of occurrence is completely
symmetrical and we call this a zero or no skew.
Most often you'll hear people say that the distribution is symmetrical for the third dataset.
We have a mean of 4.9 a median of five and a mode of six as the mean is lower than the median.
We say that there is a negative or left skew.
Once again the highest point is defined by the mode.
Why is it called aleft skew again.
That's right because the outliers are to the left.
All right.
So why is skewness important.
Skewness tells us a lot about where the data is situated.
As we mentioned in our previous lesson the mean median and mode should be used together to get a good
understanding of the data set measures of a symmetry like skewness are the link between central tendency
measures and probability theory which ultimately allows us to get a more complete understanding of the
data we are working with.